User Generated Common Law  


User generated content, UGC, is a true cornerstone of our social selves; as a growing part of our social interactions are conducted online, cultural contribution and consumption do too, and blogging, online commenting, posting of artistic outputs, educational material and scholarship are thriving. Beyond that, UGC has evolved into a primary mechanism by which innovation and creativity are considerably advanced, as many online service providers maintain platforms by which users can collaborate on new and existing projects.

Quite remarkably, this vibrant space has been largely regulated by what pertains to be a contractual system, with minimal intervention by policy makers. Generally speaking, platform operators have devised their own regulatory schemes singlehandedly, and enforced it with hardly any restriction from courts. Platform operators have been allowed to do this for Privacy Policies, Copyright Policies, Security Policies, Terms of Service, as well as for bylaw policies, namely policy-making policies or secondary rules, despite the fact that in the offline world the same activities are controlled by a system of formal laws.  

This is not to say that UGC develops without an eye on the law, or rather, that it is evolving without reliance on a formal regulatory environment. To be sure, UGC, a complex social activity is enabled by a broad normative foundation. By nature, this normative foundation is non-uniform across online venues and UGC enterprises, the reason for that being, at least in part, the absence of a consolidating legal framework. Also, the normative foundation for UGC is multifarious, and comprised of copyright law, in itself non-uniform, other applicable laws, different applications of private law, soft laws like website guidelines and policies, hard system code, online ethics and standard practices.

UGC’s broad dependence upon a mesh of private law, as well as on standard practices, is in large part the expression of a necessity to accommodate to the obtuse legal benchmark of copyright. Thus, our interest revolves around license agreements, both commercial and free, which cultural actors take pain in applying to their works. The basic argument being that the habitual efforts by content contributors to license their works, are explained by the general malcontent of UGC contributors with the legal benchmark of copyright, which motivates an attempt to produce a better fit between their endeavors and the legal regime that would apply to them.  Otherwise, it would be hard to explain the frequency of license adoption of online cultural contributors, who fundamentally are non-legal actors.

Assuming that the former description is true to the state of affairs, one is left to wonder why has the legal system remained so steadfast. Indeed, if nothing else, these actions by UGC contributors, should signal that the legal default is found in equilibrium of inefficiency. Inefficiency, because we see so many single acts of legal agency toward change, and by unlikely actors, and equilibrium, because it doesn’t seem like there are any dynamics toward a change in overarching legal framework. Therefore, the question remains, what is the source of the constraint on the creation of this dynamic, and what can be done to undermine it.

If not to centrally effectuate copyright reform, the legal system should at least not hinder self-help, and allow these self-applied legal regimes to operate with utmost efficiency. This ought to mean the careful enforcement of the license terms, in particular those of the most prominent online license platforms as attested by wide adoption of communities of cultural actors in different fields.  This way the legal system would be exercising a Pareto improvement, if not an optimum, by correcting the loss of welfare, which is the result of augmented transaction costs incurred by the ambiguity of the licenses, their proliferation, and their non-interoperabiliy. In addition, this form of careful enforcement would permit the formal normative environment to cultivate online cultural communities, by encouraging their practices, as it would support the cultural contributors’ independent acts of legal agency, further empowering them to make use of the power vested in them by copyright itself. Indirectly, this would be a way for the legal system to nurture the legal intermediaries that are the organizations promoting the most efficient license frameworks: These organizations should continue supporting the license mechanisms that are capable of creating a better operating cultural enterprise since much to do is in tow.

Yet this paper makes a much more fundamental argument: That as we have come to the age of user generated content, we have also come to a time where we should be recognizing UGL, or User Generated Law. In other words, the pervasive singular acts of legal agency by cultural actors, conducted within communities in a way as to influence norms of creation and consumption, should be allowed to impact the overarching public legal framework. In this context being offered is that UGC contributors - due to their continuous adoption of distinct licenses, which consistently alters the default regime and gradually changes methods of production to vertical collaboration - should not only have their wishes respected by the enforcement of the license terms, but also allowed to impact the broader legal environment. Namely, the argument is that much like the vertical process of creation of UGC contributions, so should its direct actors be perpetrating a vertical graded change in copyright, a UGL contribution.

A method by which this could happen is to recognize repetitive license adoptions as a form of lex artifex, serving to illuminate the expectations of the creative communities, in a way that would ultimately instruct common law development of copyright. Much space in the paper is dedicated to descriptions of possible modus operandi for users to generate law. Indeed, it seems to be at least a matter of poetic truth, that where so much of our cultural enterprise takes place as a vertical non-centralized process, in both time and place, as UGC does, that there would be a process by which the law regulating it internalizes direct contributions that are made to it.  

To recap this short abstract, this change would not only allow UGC to achieve an optimum, but it would also enable the legal field of copyright to gradually correct its own inefficiencies, stemming from its heterogeneity in some cases and its homogeneity in others. Certainly, if we are to view User Generated Content as an enterprise of learning,  the law governing it should be allowed to learn as well through the actions of the users.  
